Managing illness better requires a broad range of health responses, including public health approaches,
that improve and maintain Aboriginal health and wellbeing. Services need to be easily accessible and
strengthen the family and community role in improving health and wellbeing and support returning care
to the home.
When Aboriginal people are engaged and have access to culturally relevant health information and
support, they will be better placed to adhere to treatment regimens and manage lifestyle related risk
factors. This will lead to better clinical outcomes and better quality of life. There is potential for health
gain and reducing the gap in life expectancy of Aboriginal people, through prevention strategies and
improved management of existing illness and chronic diseases. Managing illness better recognises the
need for attention on preventing risk factors, improving diagnosis, having access to appropriate tests and
procedures, clinical treatment and self-management of chronic diseases.
People need to feel engaged in their health care, and have the option to be cared for within their
community and on country, whenever possible. Enhancing the knowledge and skills needed to
understand and use health information can directly affect health outcomes. It has the potential to improve
how people navigate the health system, gain access and respond to information and services.
Suggested activities to address this priority area:
* Improve access to health information and services without having to leave family, community and
country.
* Improve health knowledge to support Aboriginal people, families and communities to take back the
care, control and responsibility for their own health and wellbeing.
* Incorporate traditional healing, knowledge and practices into services delivery.
* Recognise the importance of culture, community, holistic approaches and the right to self-determination.
* Support Aboriginal people to choose healthy lifestyles and engage with prevention and early
intervention messages and activities.
